Update Microarray Ortholog Mapping example (#246)
AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples: 02-microarray/ortholog-mapping_microarray_01_ensembl.Rmd

}
```

In the same place you put this `.Rmd` file, you should now have three new empty folders called `data`, `plots`, and `results`!

## Obtain the dataset from refine.bio

For general information about downloading data for these examples, see our ['Getting Started' section](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/01-getting-started/getting-started.html#how-to-get-the-data). 

Go to this [dataset's page on refine.bio](https://www.refine.bio/experiments/GSE71270/creb-overexpression-induces-leukemia-in-zebrafish-by-blocking-myeloid-differentiation-process).

Click the "Download Now" button on the right side of this screen.  

<img src="https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/raw/e140face75daa6d2c34e30a4755c362e6039a677/template/screenshots/download-now.png" width=200>  

Fill out the pop up window with your email and our Terms and Conditions:  

<img src="https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/raw/e140face75daa6d2c34e30a4755c362e6039a677/template/screenshots/download-email.png" width=500>  

It may take a few minutes for the dataset to process.
You will get an email when it is ready. 

## About the dataset we are using for this example

> For this example analysis, we will use this [CREB overexpression zebrafish dataset](https://www.refine.bio/experiments/GSE71270/creb-overexpression-induces-leukemia-in-zebrafish-by-blocking-myeloid-differentiation-process), which contains 10 samples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this example analysis, we will use this [CREB overexpression zebrafish dataset](https://www.refine.bio/experiments/GSE71270/creb-overexpression-induces-leukemia-in-zebrafish-by-blocking-myeloid-differentiation-process).
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> @Tregnago2016 measured microarray gene expression of zebrafish samples overexpressing human CREB, as well as control samples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
@Tregnago2016 measured microarray gene expression of ten zebrafish samples, five overexpressing human CREB, as well as five control samples.
```

  tibble::column_to_rownames("Gene")
```

Let's ensure that the metadata and data are in the same sample order. 

```{r}
# Make the data in the order of the metadata
df <- df %>%
  dplyr::select(metadata$geo_accession)

# Check if this is in the same order
all.equal(colnames(df), metadata$geo_accession)

# Bring back the "Gene" column in preparation for mapping
df <- df %>%
  tibble::rownames_to_column("Gene")
```

## Mapping zebrafish Ensembl gene IDs to human symbols

refine.bio data uses Ensembl gene identifiers, which will be in the first column.

```{r}
# Let's take a look at the first 6 items in the first column of `df`
head(df[, 1])
```

In zebrafish, Ensembl gene identifiers begin with `ENSDARG`.

Now let's do the conversion!
We'll use the `zebrafish` data from `hcop`; this is what `zebrafish` looks like.

```{r}
zebrafish
```

We're interested in the `human_symbol` and `zebrafish_ensembl` columns specifically.

```{r}
human_symbol_df <- zebrafish %>%
  # we'll want to subset zebrafish to only the columns we're interested in
  dplyr::select(zebrafish_ensembl, human_symbol) %>%
  # only retain the genes from the expression matrix that are in zebrafish data

>   dplyr::inner_join(df, by = c("zebrafish_ensembl" = "Gene"))

Reviewer: But, I would reverse the order of the data frames and do a left join instead. I think `left_join()`s are more intuitive to follow (could be just me).

```

Here's what the new data frame looks like:

```{r}
head(human_symbol_df, 25)
```

Let's get a summary of the gene symbols returned in the `human_symbol` column of our mapped data frame.

```{r}
# We can use the `summary()` function to get a better idea of the distribution of symbols in the `Symbol` column
summary(as.factor(human_symbol_df$human_symbol)) # We need to use the `as.factor()` function here in order to get the count of each unique value returned
```

Looks like we have mapped symbols!
It does not explicitly tell us if we have IDs that did not map to symbols, which would result in NAs so let's explore to find out if we do have any.

```{r}

> any(is.na(human_symbol_df$human_symbol)) # Logical statement to check if there are any NAs in the `human_symbol` column of our mapped data frame

Author: Ah, of course!! I did find the no NAs situation strange as well but completely overlooked this issue in the order of things.

```

> There are no NAs!

Reviewer: I find it unlikely (maybe impossible?) that a no NAs situation would happen when mapping across species. So that's what was suspicious to me and made me look again at your `inner_join()` step.

This means that all of our zebrafish Ensembl IDs mapped to at least one human gene symbol!
This is exciting because it is not always the case everything maps across species and that is okay.

However, if you have almost all NAs it is possible that the function was executed incorrectly or you may want to consider using a different gene identifier, if possible.

> ## Write results to file

Reviewer: Now that I see what's coming up next, I wouldn't go to writing this file yet before we explore what's here in the next sections. So I'd move this section down toward the end of this notebook.

Now let's write our results to file.

```{r}
readr::write_tsv(
  human_symbol_df,
  file.path(
    results_dir,
    "GSE71270_ensembl_to_human_gene_symbol.tsv" # Replace with a relevant output file name
  )
)
```

> *Some things to note:*

Reviewer: I think this should become its own section of sorts. Something like `Sorting out multi mappings`

* Multiple zebrafish Ensembl gene IDs map to the same human symbol which results in duplicated human gene symbols.
Some downstream tools may need this to be resolved.

> One way to resolve this may be to map to a different gene identifier.

Reviewer: I know you pointed this out in your PR summary, but can you say more about what you mean by this?

Author: In other words, another gene identifier may have a better 1:1 ratio to the zebrafish Ensembl IDs, i.e. human Ensembl IDs instead of symbols (like I see you mention below).

Reviewer: I would use the wording here instead of what you have in the notebook. And probably move away from using the word `resolve` in this context since it's not so much a problem to be solved as it is just the nature of how IDs map across species and between ID types (as in ortholog mapping is shaky at best).

See our [gene ID annotation microarray notebook](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/02-microarrary/gene-id-annotation_microarray_01_ensembl.html) for an example of mapping between gene identifiers.
* If a zebrafish Ensembl gene ID maps to multiple human symbols, the gene expression values get duplicated.
Let's look at the `ENSDARG00000069142` example below.

```{r}

> human_symbol_df %>%

Reviewer: I like this using an example to illustrate the idea you are explaining can you do the same for the first bullet point as well? 

I think it makes sense to split this into two sections, something like: `collapsing duplicate human IDs` and `collapsing/summarizing multiple zebrafish IDs`. 

But of course the `collapsing/summarizing multiple zebrafish IDs` strategy we will have to think about what makes the most sense. This will be dependent on what a user would be using this for downstream, which we can't know for certainty, but we can try to model what we think the most common use cases would be.

  dplyr::filter(zebrafish_ensembl == "ENSDARG00000069142")
```

We can collapse the multi-mapped values into a list for each Ensembl ID or we can keep it in the format above with one row for each mapped ID (resulting in duplicated rows for some Ensembl IDs).

## Collapse mapped values

In the next chunk, we show how we can collapse all the symbols into one column where we store them all for each unique Ensembl ID.

```{r}
collapsed_symbol_df <- human_symbol_df %>%
  # Group by Ensembl IDs
  dplyr::group_by(zebrafish_ensembl) %>%
  # Collapse the mapped values in `human_symbol_df` into one column named `all_human_symbols`
  dplyr::summarize(all_human_symbols = paste(human_symbol, collapse = ";"))

head(collapsed_symbol_df)
```

Since multiple zebrafish Ensembl gene IDs map to the same human symbol, we can also collapse all Ensembl IDs that each unique gene symbol mapped to.

```{r}

> collapsed_ensembl_df <- human_symbol_df %>%

Reviewer: Currently, this doesn't end up having the data associated with it, and I'm hesitant to combine values across zebrafish transcripts using an average, because that is a lot of data to lose and will likely not be representative of the zebrafish biology (which is an inherent issue with ortholog mapping).

  # Group by human gene symbols
  dplyr::group_by(human_symbol) %>%
  # Collapse the Ensembl IDs in `human_symbol_df` into one column named `all_zebrafish_ensembl_ids`
  dplyr::summarize(all_zebrafish_ensembl_ids = paste(zebrafish_ensembl, collapse = ";"))

head(collapsed_ensembl_df)
```
The final format in which you save your results data frame largely depends on your question and the downstream analyses/tools that you would like to implement.

## Write collapsed results to file

We are going to save the results data frame where we have collapsed human gene symbols into one column for each unique zebrafish Ensembl ID.

```{r}
readr::write_tsv(
  collapsed_symbol_df,
  file.path(
    results_dir,
    "GSE71270_collapsed_ensembl_to_human_gene_symbol.tsv" # Replace with a relevant output file name
  )
)
```

# Resources for further learning

- [HCOP: the HGNC comparison of orthology predictions search tool](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16284797/) [@Wright2005]

> 

Reviewer: When the RNA-seq example is done we will want to link it here.

This chunk of code will read the both TSV files and add them as data frames to your environment.

```{r}
# Read in metadata TSV file
metadata <- readr::read_tsv(file.path(
  data_dir, # Replace with path to your metadata file
  "metadata_GSE71270.tsv" # Replace with the name of your metadata file
))

# Read in data TSV file
df <- readr::read_tsv(file.path(
  data_dir, # Replace with path to your data file
  "GSE71270.tsv" # Replace with the name of your data file
)) %>%
  # Tuck away the Gene ID column as rownames
  tibble::column_to_rownames("Gene")
```

Let's ensure that the metadata and data are in the same sample order. 

```{r}
# Make the data in the order of the metadata
df <- df %>%
  dplyr::select(metadata$geo_accession)

# Check if this is in the same order
all.equal(colnames(df), metadata$geo_accession)

# Bring back the "Gene" column in preparation for mapping
df <- df %>%
  tibble::rownames_to_column("Gene")
```

## Mapping zebrafish Ensembl gene IDs to human symbols

refine.bio data uses Ensembl gene identifiers, which will be in the first column.

```{r}
# Let's take a look at the first 6 items in the `Gene` column of `df`
head(df$Gene)
```

> Enembl gene identifiers have different species-specific prefixes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ensembl gene identifiers have different species-specific prefixes. 
```

In zebrafish, Ensembl gene identifiers begin with `ENSDARG` (in human, `ENSG`, etc.).

Now let's do the conversion!
We'll use the `zebrafish` data from `hcop`; this is what `zebrafish` looks like.

```{r}
zebrafish
```

We're interested in the `human_symbol` and `zebrafish_ensembl` columns specifically.

```{r}
human_zebrafish_key <- zebrafish %>%
  # we'll want to subset zebrafish to only the columns we're interested in

>   dplyr::select(zebrafish_ensembl, human_symbol)

Reviewer: Can make this its own chunk? I see it as being its own step.

Reviewer: Also based on the output where we have duplicated values, this tells me that there are duplicated keys here (because remember `zebrafish` has more the `symbols` so they would repeat `zebrafish_ensembl` and  `human_symbol` for these instances. Because of this, we should make sure our key doesn't have replicates before we do a `join()`. Try this and let me know if that works. 
```suggestion
  dplyr::select(zebrafish_ensembl, human_symbol) %>% 
  dplyr::distinct() 
```
We will want to carefully explain what this `distinct()` and why it's necessary. May even want to take a minute to show the duplicated data before applying it.

# Now let's join the expression data from `df` for the subset of genes in `df`
human_zebrafish_mapped_df <- df %>%
  dplyr::left_join(human_zebrafish_key, by = c("Gene" = "zebrafish_ensembl"))
```

Here's what the new data frame looks like:

```{r}
head(human_zebrafish_mapped_df, n = 25)
```

Let's get a summary of the gene symbols returned in the `human_symbol` column of our mapped data frame.

```{r}
# We can use the `count()` function to get a count of the distribution of values in the `human_symbol` column
human_zebrafish_mapped_df %>%
  dplyr::group_by(human_symbol) %>%
  dplyr::count() %>%
  # Sort by highest `n` which would be the human gene symbol with the most mapped zebrafish Ensembl IDs
  dplyr::arrange(desc(n))
```

Looks like we have mapped symbols!

> We also have 415 NAs, which is okay, because we do not expect everything to map across species.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also have 415 NAs, which is okay, because we do not expect everything to map across species.
```
This finding, although good to have, is not clear from the output shown here, can add a small chunk that shows how to get this number?

> ## Sort out multi mappings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Sort out multi-mappings
```
Feels like this should have a hyphen? Whatever we have done elsewhere we should do here.

* Multiple zebrafish Ensembl gene IDs map to the same human symbol which results in duplicated human gene symbols.
Some downstream tools may require the data be simplified to 1:1 mappings.

> Using another gene identifier may result in a better 1:1 ratio to the zebrafish Ensembl IDs, i.e. human Ensembl IDs instead of human gene symbols.

Author: I got rid of this part (and the sentence above it which I realize was duplicated). I can put it back if another reviewer finds it useful but I understand your point here and was not sure myself how useful it really was.

See our [gene ID annotation microarray notebook](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/02-microarrary/gene-id-annotation_microarray_01_ensembl.html) for an example of mapping between gene identifiers.

> * If a zebrafish Ensembl gene ID maps to multiple human symbols, the gene expression values get duplicated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a zebrafish Ensembl gene ID maps to multiple human symbols, the gene expression values get duplicated.
```
Not sure if the bullet points really add to clarity in the rendering anymore.

Let's look at the `ENSDARG00000069142` example below.

```{r}
human_zebrafish_mapped_df %>%
  dplyr::filter(Gene == "ENSDARG00000069142") %>%

>   dplyr::select(Gene, human_symbol, dplyr::everything())

Reviewer: Yes, I would do this step earlier so you only need to do it once. (see earlier comment)

```

> * On the other, if a human gene symbol maps to multiple zebrafish Ensembl IDs, the gene expression values do not necessarily get duplicated.

Reviewer: They should not unless in the original `zebrrafish` dataset there was a different id that meant we needed duplicates. We will want to get rid of these instance where data is duplicated for no reason, I will comment on where I think that needs to happen.

Reviewer: I _think_ if you use the change I suggest regarding `distinct()` you will be able to say this statement more absolutely. 
```suggestion
Remember that our original data is associate to zebrafish Ensembl IDs, so when a human gene symbol maps to multiple zebrafish Ensembl IDs, the data will not get duplicated, but you will have multiple rows associated with that human symbol. 
```

Let's look at the `A1BG` example below.

```{r}
human_zebrafish_mapped_df %>%
  dplyr::filter(human_symbol == "MATR3") %>%
  dplyr::select(Gene, human_symbol, dplyr::everything())
```

> ## Collapse multiple mapped human gene symbols

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Collapse multi-mapped human gene symbols
```
Whatever we call them, we should be consistent.

> We can collapse the multi-mapped values into a list for each Ensembl ID or we can keep it in the format above with one row for each mapped ID (resulting in duplicated rows for some Ensembl IDs).

Reviewer: Here we have a hyphen.

> We can collapse the multi-mapped values into a list for each Ensembl ID or we can keep it in the format above with one row for each mapped ID (resulting in duplicated rows for some Ensembl IDs).

Reviewer: Since these multi-mappings can go either way `1zebra:manyhumans` or `manyzebras:1human`, we should try to make this wording more clear. 

Using a consistent wording/notation would be good. I think what I used above is kinda silly, but something like it might be good.

In the next chunk, we show how we can collapse all the human gene symbols into one column where we store them all for each unique zebrafish Ensembl ID.

```{r}
collapsed_human_symbol_df <- human_zebrafish_mapped_df %>%
  # Group by Ensembl IDs
  dplyr::group_by(Gene) %>%
  # Collapse the mapped values in `human_zebrafish_mapped_df` into one column named `all_human_symbols`
  dplyr::summarize(all_human_symbols = paste(human_symbol, collapse = ";")) %>%
  # Now we need get the gene expression data back
  dplyr::left_join(df, by = "Gene")

head(collapsed_human_symbol_df)
```

### Write results to file

Now let's write our results to file.

```{r}
readr::write_tsv(
  collapsed_human_symbol_df,
  file.path(
    results_dir,
    "GSE71270_zebrafish_ensembl_to_collapsed_human_gene_symbol.tsv" # Replace with a relevant output file name
  )
)
```

> ## Collapse multiple mapped zebrafish Ensembl IDs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Collapse multi-mapped zebrafish Ensembl IDs
```

> Since multiple zebrafish Ensembl gene IDs map to the same human symbol, we can also collapse all Ensembl IDs that each unique gene symbol mapped to.

Reviewer: Maybe this kind of file is still useful? I don't know why it would be, though. Will need others to weigh in here.

> Since multiple zebrafish Ensembl gene IDs map to the same human symbol, we can also collapse all Ensembl IDs that each unique gene symbol mapped to.

Reviewer 2: I think this really depends on the analysis. I can see times when you might want to see changes in any gene related to a human gene, so you would want to keep all rows, despite multiple mapping of human to <organism>. But you might want to drop things that are more likely to be spurious. So maybe not the most supporting databases, but maybe include ones that are in more than one? 

I do think we want to be careful here not to encourage people to throw away perfectly good data. What would it mean if there was a large change in expression in a gene that was one of 5 that mapped to a single human gene? Would we want to throw it out? Almost certainly not! 

On the other hand, we would probably would want to know if an orthology relationship was not well supported by the databases.

---
title: "Ortholog Mapping with `hcop` - Microarray"
author: "CCDL for ALSF"
date: "`r format(Sys.time(), '%B %Y')`"
output:   
  html_notebook:
    toc: true
    toc_float: true
    number_sections: true
---

# Purpose of this analysis

This notebook demonstrates how you can use the [`hcop`](https://github.com/stephenturner/hcop) package to perform ortholog mapping for microarray data obtained from refine.bio.

> In this notebook, we will use zebrafish data from refine.bio and annotate it with human gene symbols from HGNC Comparison of Orthology Predictions (HCOP).

Reviewer 2: Worth linking to the original source here? https://www.genenames.org/tools/hcop/

# Using a different refine.bio dataset with this analysis?

If you'd like to adapt an example analysis to use a different dataset from [refine.bio](https://www.refine.bio/), we recommend placing the files in the `data/` directory you created and changing the filenames and paths in the notebook to match these files (we've put comments to signify where you would need to change the code).
We suggest saving plots and results to `plots/` and `results/` directories, respectively, as these are automatically created by the notebook.
From here you can customize this analysis example to fit your own scientific questions and preferences. 

***

<!-- Do not delete this line --> <a name="analysis" style="padding-top:56px;margin-top:-56px;">&nbsp;</a>

# Ortholog Mapping with `hcop` - Microarray

## Install libraries

See our Getting Started page with [instructions for package installation](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/01-getting-started/getting-started.html#what-you-need-to-install) for a list of the other software you will need, as well as more tips and resources.

> In this analysis, we will be using `hcop` to map between zebrafish and human identifiers [@Turner2018].

Reviewer 2: I think we need a lot more information here (or at the top) about what HCOP is.

We'll need to use the `devtools` package to install `hcop` from GitHub [@Wickham2020].

```{r}
if (!("devtools" %in% installed.packages())) {
  install.packages("devtools")
}
```

Now we can install `hcop` from Github.

> You can control what version of the package is installed by using the `ref` command of `devtools::install_github`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can control what version of the package is installed by using the `ref` argument of `devtools::install_github()`.
```

```{r}
# Attach the library
library(hcop)

# We will need this so we can use the pipe: %>%
library(magrittr)
```

## Import and set up data

Data downloaded from refine.bio include a metadata tab separated values (TSV) file and a data TSV file. 
This chunk of code will read the both TSV files and add them as data frames to your environment.

```{r}
# Read in metadata TSV file
metadata <- readr::read_tsv(file.path(
  data_dir, # Replace with path to your metadata file
  "metadata_GSE71270.tsv" # Replace with the name of your metadata file
))

# Read in data TSV file
df <- readr::read_tsv(file.path(
  data_dir, # Replace with path to your data file
  "GSE71270.tsv" # Replace with the name of your data file
)) %>%
  # Tuck away the Gene ID column as rownames
  tibble::column_to_rownames("Gene")
```

Let's ensure that the metadata and data are in the same sample order. 

```{r}
# Make the data in the order of the metadata
df <- df %>%
  dplyr::select(metadata$geo_accession)

# Check if this is in the same order
all.equal(colnames(df), metadata$geo_accession)

# Bring back the "Gene" column in preparation for mapping
df <- df %>%
  tibble::rownames_to_column("Gene")
```

> ## Mapping zebrafish Ensembl gene IDs to human symbols

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Mapping human gene symbols to zebrafish Ensembl gene IDs
```
I think ordering helps.

refine.bio data uses Ensembl gene identifiers, which will be in the first column.

```{r}
# Let's take a look at the first 6 items in the `Gene` column of `df`
head(df$Gene)
```

Ensembl gene identifiers have different species-specific prefixes. 
In zebrafish, Ensembl gene identifiers begin with `ENSDARG` (in human, `ENSG`, etc.).

> Now let's do the conversion!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now let's do the mapping!
```

We'll use the `zebrafish` data from `hcop`; this is what `zebrafish` looks like.

```{r}
zebrafish
```

> We're interested in the `human_symbol` and `zebrafish_ensembl` columns specifically.

Reviewer 2: The power of `hcop` is that it is a compilation of multiple orthology predctions. Because of that, one of the most important parts of the data is the `support` column, so we should make use of that as well. This suggests a way to resolve some of the multimappings: take the one with the most support, or with support from the databases you trust. (Most support is probably the best choice for this notebook.)

```{r}
human_zebrafish_key <- zebrafish %>%
  # We'll want to subset zebrafish to only the columns we're interested in
  dplyr::select(zebrafish_ensembl, human_symbol)

# Since we ignored the additional columns in `zebrafish`, let's check to see if we have any duplicates in our `human_zebrafish_key`
any(duplicated(human_zebrafish_key))
```

We do have duplicates!

> We don't want to handle duplicate data, so let's remove those duplicates before moving forward.

Reviewer: This is great. +1

```{r}
human_zebrafish_key <- human_zebrafish_key %>%
  # We need to use the `distinct()` function to remove duplicates resulted from ignoring the additional columns in the `zebrafish` object
  dplyr::distinct()
```

Now let's join the mapped data from `human_zebrafish_key` with the expression data in `df`.

```{r}
human_zebrafish_mapped_df <- df %>%
  dplyr::left_join(human_zebrafish_key, by = c("Gene" = "zebrafish_ensembl")) %>%
  # Sort so that the columns with the zebrafish Ensembl IDs and human gene symbols are first
  dplyr::select(Gene, human_symbol, dplyr::everything())
```

Here's what the new data frame looks like:

```{r}
head(human_zebrafish_mapped_df, n = 25)
```

> Let's get a summary of the gene symbols returned in the `human_symbol` column of our mapped data frame.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's get a summary of the human gene symbols returned in our mapped data frame, `human_zebrafish_mapped_df`. 
```

```{r}

> # We can use the `count()` function to get a count of the distribution of values in the `human_symbol` column

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# We can use this `count()` function after `group_by()`to get a count of how many `zebrafish_ensembl` IDs there are per `human_symbol`s 
```
Trying to make this a tad more specific.

human_zebrafish_mapped_df %>%
  dplyr::group_by(human_symbol) %>%
  dplyr::count() %>%
  # Sort by highest `n` which would be the human gene symbol with the most mapped zebrafish Ensembl IDs
  dplyr::arrange(desc(n))
```

Looks like we have mapped symbols!

Now, let's get an idea of how many zebrafish Ensembl IDs we have that were not mapped to human gene symbols.

```{r}
sum(is.na(human_zebrafish_mapped_df$human_symbol))
```

We have 415 NAs, which means we have 415 zebrafish Ensembl IDs that were not mapped to human gene symbols.
This is okay because we do not expect everything to map across species.

> ## Sort out multi-mappings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Take a look at some multi-mappings
```

If a zebrafish Ensembl gene ID maps to multiple human symbols, the gene expression values get duplicated.
Let's look at the `ENSDARG00000069142` example below.

```{r}
human_zebrafish_mapped_df %>%
  dplyr::filter(Gene == "ENSDARG00000069142")
```

> Remember that our original data is associate to zebrafish Ensembl IDs, so when a human gene symbol maps to multiple zebrafish Ensembl IDs, the data will not get duplicated, but you will have multiple rows associated with that human symbol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remember that our original data is associated to zebrafish Ensembl IDs, so when a human gene symbol maps to multiple zebrafish Ensembl IDs, the data will not get duplicated, but you will have multiple rows associated with that human symbol.
```
That was probably a typo I left in my suggestion?

The [HGNC Comparison of Orthology Predictions (HCOP)](https://www.genenames.org/tools/hcop/) is a search tool that combines orthology predictions for a specified human gene, or set of human genes, by eggNOG, Ensembl Compara, HGNC, HomoloGene, Inparanoid, NCBI Gene Orthology, OMA, OrthoDB, OrthoMCL, Panther, PhylomeDB, PomBase, TreeFam and ZFIN, allowing users to obtain and compare orthology data [@Wright2005].
The prediction with the most number of databases which concur is considered the most reliable.
HCOP was originally designed to show orthology predictions between human and mouse, but has been expanded to include data from 18 genomes, including zebrafish, which we will use in this notebook [@hcop-help].

In the next chunk, we have adapted code from the [`hcop` package R script](https://github.com/stephenturner/hcop/blob/master/data-raw/hcop.R) to retrieve the zebrafish and human mapped data from the HGNC database [@Turner2018].

```{r}
# Read in the data from HGNC
zebrafish <-
  paste0(
    "ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/genenames/hcop/",

>     "human_",

Reviewer: It may be nice to have more advice around how one would figure out how to change this for other species and how to see what species and options are available.

    "zebrafish", # Replace with the organism you have data for
    "_hcop_fifteen_column.txt.gz"
  ) %>%

>   data.table::fread() %>%

Reviewer: I would probably declare the URL in its own chunk and then read in with `data.table::fread()` in the next. This will be the first time (I think) that we use something besides `readr::read_tsv()` so we may want to give a quick comment on why we the change (I am assuming this file is large and that is why).

>   set_names(names(.) %>% gsub("_gene$", "", .)) # Removing some extra wording in some of the column names

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  set_names(names(.) %>% 
  gsub("_gene$", "", .)) # Removing some extra wording in some of the column names
```

```

> 

Reviewer: I would print out a preview of the first few lines of `zebrafish` so users can see what it looks like since this is a new thing. (aka always be telling them to look at the data to get familiar)

))

# Read in data TSV file
df <- readr::read_tsv(file.path(
  data_dir, # Replace with path to your data file
  "GSE71270.tsv" # Replace with the name of your data file
)) %>%
  # Tuck away the Gene ID column as rownames
  tibble::column_to_rownames("Gene")
```

Let's ensure that the metadata and data are in the same sample order. 

```{r}
# Make the data in the order of the metadata
df <- df %>%
  dplyr::select(metadata$geo_accession)

# Check if this is in the same order
all.equal(colnames(df), metadata$geo_accession)

# Bring back the "Gene" column in preparation for mapping
df <- df %>%
  tibble::rownames_to_column("Gene")
```

## Mapping human gene symbols to zebrafish Ensembl gene IDs

refine.bio data uses Ensembl gene identifiers, which will be in the first column.

```{r}
# Let's take a look at the first 6 items in the `Gene` column of `df`
head(df$Gene)
```

Ensembl gene identifiers have different species-specific prefixes. 
In zebrafish, Ensembl gene identifiers begin with `ENSDARG` (in human, `ENSG`, etc.).

Now let's do the mapping!
We'll use the `zebrafish` data from the HGNC database; this is what `zebrafish` looks like.

```{r}

> zebrafish

Reviewer: Oh I see you still have this here, probably just move this earlier then.

The [HGNC Comparison of Orthology Predictions (HCOP)](https://www.genenames.org/tools/hcop/) is a search tool that combines orthology predictions for a specified human gene, or set of human genes, by eggNOG, Ensembl Compara, HGNC, HomoloGene, Inparanoid, NCBI Gene Orthology, OMA, OrthoDB, OrthoMCL, Panther, PhylomeDB, PomBase, TreeFam and ZFIN, allowing users to obtain and compare orthology data [@Wright2005].
The prediction with the most number of databases which concur is considered the most reliable.
HCOP was originally designed to show orthology predictions between human and mouse, but has been expanded to include data from 18 genomes, including zebrafish, which we will use in this notebook [@hcop-help].

In the next chunk, we have adapted code from the [`hcop` package R script](https://github.com/stephenturner/hcop/blob/master/data-raw/hcop.R) to retrieve the zebrafish and human mapped data from the HGNC database [@Turner2018].

```{r}
# Define URL to desired organism ortholog mapping file from the HGNC database
zebrafish_hgnc_url <- paste0(
  "ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/genenames/hcop/",
  "human_",

>   "zebrafish",

Author: Let me know what you think on the way I restructured this section @jashapiro, I have not yet added the file on s3 because I was not entirely sure if we would want to keep the file in `02-microarray/data` or if we would want to create a specific folder within data for this file, like `02-microarray/data/zebrafish-ortholog-mapping`.

  # Replace with the organism you have data for; see the list of possible files from the HGNC at this link: ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/genenames/hcop/
  "_hcop_fifteen_column.txt.gz"
)
```

```{r}
# Read in the data from HGNC
zebrafish <- data.table::fread(zebrafish_hgnc_url) %>% # Here we use `data.table::fread()` instead of `readr::read_tsv()` because we expect this file to be large so the `fread()` function is faster/more efficient here
  set_names(names(.) %>%
    gsub("_gene$", "", .)) # Removing some extra wording in some of the column names
```

Let's take a look at what `zebrafish` looks like.

```{r}

> zebrafish

Author: I took a dive into the docs and found that `df_print` option seems like the best solution for this issue. I implemented `df_print: paged` in this notebook and added it to `scripts/render-notebooks.R`. Let me know if this seems like a good solution or if we should explore another.

  dplyr::distinct()
```

Now let's join the mapped data from `human_zebrafish_key` with the expression data in `df`.

```{r}
human_zebrafish_mapped_df <- df %>%
  dplyr::left_join(human_zebrafish_key, by = c("Gene" = "zebrafish_ensembl")) %>%
  # Sort so that the columns with the zebrafish Ensembl IDs and human gene symbols are first
  dplyr::select(Gene, human_symbol, dplyr::everything())
```

Here's what the new data frame looks like:

```{r}
head(human_zebrafish_mapped_df, n = 25)
```

Let's get a summary of the human gene symbols returned in our mapped data frame, `human_zebrafish_mapped_df`. 

```{r}
# We can use this `count()` function after `group_by()`to get a count of how many `zebrafish_ensembl` IDs there are per `human_symbol`s
human_zebrafish_mapped_df %>%
  dplyr::group_by(human_symbol) %>%
  dplyr::count() %>%
  # Sort by highest `n` which would be the human gene symbol with the most mapped zebrafish Ensembl IDs
  dplyr::arrange(desc(n))
```

Looks like we have mapped symbols!

Now, let's get an idea of how many zebrafish Ensembl IDs we have that were not mapped to human gene symbols.

```{r}
sum(is.na(human_zebrafish_mapped_df$human_symbol))
```

> We have 464 NAs, which means we have 464 zebrafish Ensembl IDs that were not mapped to human gene symbols.

Author: I could not reproduce the 3538 number of NAs you got here. I did fix the typo here as I got 463 not 464, but would you be able to tell me the steps you took when you got 3538?

> We have 464 NAs, which means we have 464 zebrafish Ensembl IDs that were not mapped to human gene symbols.

Reviewer 2: I was looking at the html file you had included. But now 463 does seem correct (I doubt it was a typo, probably it changed with the new data source!)

Let's look at the `MATR3` example below.

```{r}
human_zebrafish_mapped_df %>%
  dplyr::filter(human_symbol == "MATR3")
```

## Collapse multi-mapped human gene symbols

Remember that if a zebrafish Ensembl gene ID maps to multiple human symbols, the gene expression values get duplicated.
We can collapse the multi-mapped values into a list for each Ensembl ID as to not have duplicate expression values in our data frame.

In the next chunk, we show how we can collapse all the human gene symbols into one column where we store them all for each unique zebrafish Ensembl ID.

```{r}
collapsed_human_symbol_df <- human_zebrafish_mapped_df %>%
  # Group by zebrafish Ensembl IDs
  dplyr::group_by(Gene) %>%
  # Collapse the mapped values in `human_zebrafish_mapped_df` into one column named `all_human_symbols`
  dplyr::summarize(all_human_symbols = paste(human_symbol, collapse = ";")) %>%
  # Now we need get the gene expression data back
  dplyr::left_join(df, by = "Gene")

> head(collapsed_human_symbol_df)

Reviewer 2: We lose the `support` column here. That may not be a problem, but it should probably be noted.

  file.path(
    results_dir,
    "GSE71270_zebrafish_ensembl_to_collapsed_human_gene_symbol.tsv" # Replace with a relevant output file name
  )
)
```

## Collapse multi-mapped zebrafish Ensembl IDs

Since multiple zebrafish Ensembl gene IDs map to the same human symbol, we can also collapse all Ensembl IDs that each unique gene symbol mapped to.

A known issue in ortholog mapping is how to handle this data because combining values across zebrafish transcripts using an average may result in the loss of a lot of data and will likely not be representative of the zebrafish biology.
Therefore, we will not add the expression data here since the expression values are not the same across Ensembl IDs, despite mapping to the same human gene symbol.

Instead, we will use the `support` column to decide which mappings to retain.
As we noted earlier, the prediction with the most number of databases which concur is considered the most reliable.
Therefore, where we have multi-mapped zebrafish Ensembl gene IDs, we will take the mapping with the most databases that concur according to the `support` column.

```{r}
filtered_zebrafish_ensembl_df <- human_zebrafish_mapped_df %>%

>   dplyr::mutate(n_databases = stringr::str_count(support, ",") + 1) %>% # Count the number of databases in the support column for each prediction

Reviewer 2: Nice!

---
title: "Ortholog Mapping - Microarray"
author: "CCDL for ALSF"
date: "`r format(Sys.time(), '%B %Y')`"
output:
  html_notebook:
    toc: true
    toc_float: true
    number_sections: true

>     df_print: paged

Reviewer: This will mostly be unnecessary because we render by the script. But if we want it to also show up for the users ini their locally rendering, then I suppose we should keep it, but then we need to add it to all the other modules.

Reviewer: If we do want to add this to all headers (which I'm 50-50 on) then we should file a separate "search and replace in the whole project" type issue where we implement this everywhere.e

Author: As noted by Josh in a Slack discussion, the notebook headers should not need to be changed as `paged_df` is the default for `html_notebook` so it will look the same either way for people running locally. 

I'll remove it from the notebook header in this PR but keep the change to the `render-notebooks.R` script so that the html output files render with this option.

This is where the files that reflect the data provided via the [HGNC database](https://www.genenames.org/) are maintained.
The files available for download include files that have been mapped between human and another species using the [`hcop` package](https://github.com/stephenturner/hcop/) [@Turner2018].
Ortholog species files with the '6 Column' output returns the raw assertions, Ensembl gene IDs and Entrez Gene IDs for human and one other species, while the '15 Column' output includes additional information such as the chromosomal location, accession numbers and the databases that support the assertions.

To download a file, click the file name.
For this notebook, you will want to download the file named `human_zebrafish_hcop_fifteen_column.txt.gz`.
If you are using a different dataset, you can replace `zebrafish` in `human_zebrafish_hcop_fifteen_column.txt.gz` with the name of the species you have data for, and click on that file to download.

<img src="https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/raw/07499927a22ed7aa045245e40d692f8e49d7ba52/template/screenshots/download-hgnc-zebrafish-file.png" width=400>

> Now copy and paste the `human_zebrafish_hcop_fifteen_column.txt.gz` file into your `data/` folder.

Author: I made a note where relevant in the last commit and will file an issue for future changes to cover these _odd_ cases (as you put it) 👍

We can collapse the multi-mapped values into a list for each Ensembl ID as to not have duplicate values in our data frame.

In the next chunk, we show how we can collapse all the human gene symbols into one column where we store them all for each unique zebrafish Ensembl ID.

```{r}
collapsed_human_symbol_df <- human_zebrafish_mapped_df %>%
  # Group by zebrafish Ensembl IDs
  dplyr::group_by(Gene) %>%
  # Collapse the mapped values in `human_zebrafish_mapped_df` into one column named
  # `all_human_symbols` -- note that we will lose the `support` column in this summarizing step
  dplyr::summarize(all_human_symbols = paste(human_symbol, collapse = ";"))

head(collapsed_human_symbol_df)
```

### Write results to file

Now let's write our list of human gene symbols for each unique zebrafish Ensembl ID results to file.

```{r}
readr::write_tsv(
  collapsed_human_symbol_df,
  file.path(
    results_dir,
    # Replace with a relevant output file name
    "GSE71270_zebrafish_ensembl_to_collapsed_human_gene_symbol.tsv"
  )
)
```

## Collapse human genes mapping to multiple zebrafish genes

> Since multiple zebrafish Ensembl gene IDs map to the same human symbol, we can also collapse all Ensembl IDs that each unique human gene symbol mapped to.
> 
> A known issue in ortholog mapping is how to handle this data because combining values across zebrafish transcripts using an average may result in the loss of a lot of data and will likely not be representative of the zebrafish biology.

Reviewer 2: I feel like this is still a bit unclear.. What are we trying to say here? What is the goal?

Are we are trying to find the "most similar" zebrafish gene to a given human gene? If so, looking at the level of support across databases might be one way to handle this, but it is not the only one. I think we should state very clearly here that this is not the only, or even recommended,  way to handle these multimappings.

I have written a bit below to try to get across my thoughts on the matter. 

```suggestion
Since multiple zebrafish Ensembl gene IDs map to the same human symbol, we may want to identify which one of these mappings represents the "true" ortholog, i.e. which zebrafish gene is most similar to the human gene we are interested in. 
*This is not at all straightforward!* (see, for just one example, https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btaa468)
Gene duplications along the zebrafish lineage may result in complicated relationships among genes, especially with regard to divisions of function.

Simply combining values across zebrafish transcripts using an average may result in the loss of a lot of data and will likely not be representative of the zebrafish biology.
One thing we might do to make the problem somewhat simpler is to reduce the number of multimapped genes by requiring a certain level of support for each mapping from across the various databases included in `HCOP`.
This will not fully solve the problem (and may not even be desirable in some cases), but we present it here as an example of an approach one might take.
```

Therefore, we will use the `support` column to decide which mappings to retain.
Let's take a look at `support`.

```{r}
head(human_zebrafish_mapped_df$support)
```

Looks like we have a variety of databases for multiple mappings, but we do have some instances of only one database reported in support of the mapping.
As we noted earlier, an orthology prediction where more than one of the databases concur would be considered reliable.
Therefore, where we have multi-mapped zebrafish Ensembl gene IDs, we will take the mappings with more than one database to support the assertion.

```{r}
filtered_zebrafish_ensembl_df <- human_zebrafish_mapped_df %>%
  # Count the number of databases in the support column for each prediction
  dplyr::mutate(n_databases = stringr::str_count(support, ",") + 1) %>%
  # Group by human gene symbols
  dplyr::group_by(human_symbol) %>%
  # Now filter for the rows with more than one database in support for each human gene symbol
  dplyr::filter(n_databases > 1)

head(filtered_zebrafish_ensembl_df)

> ```

Reviewer 2: We might look to see before and after how many multimapped genes there are. I would expect it does not go to zero, and we should note that.

Author: Let me know if what I added in the [last commit](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/pull/246/commits/2717346bbcfcc5a55f001d39d027b10b40260a28#diff-6e1a150e702a9b814aaf52aa272f45dadb468d003ccbfcdbc6be1da2ccd5cb55R381) sufficiently addresses your comment here @jashapiro.

output:
  html_notebook:
    toc: true
    toc_float: true
    number_sections: true
---

# Purpose of this analysis

This notebook demonstrates how you can use data from the HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee (HGNC) database to perform ortholog mapping for microarray data obtained from refine.bio.
In this notebook, we will use zebrafish data from refine.bio and annotate it with human gene symbols from HGNC.

⬇️ [**Jump to the analysis code**](#analysis) ⬇️

# How to run this example

For general information about our tutorials and the basic software packages you will need, please see our ['Getting Started' section](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/01-getting-started/getting-started.html#how-this-tutorial-is-structured).
We recommend taking a look at our [Resources for Learning R](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/01-getting-started/getting-started.html#resources-for-learning-r) if you have not written code in R before. 

## Obtain the `.Rmd` file

To run this example yourself, [download the `.Rmd` for this analysis by clicking this link](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/02-microarray/ortholog-mapping_microarray_01_ensembl.Rmd).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clicking this link will most likely send this to your downloads folder on your computer. 
Move this `.Rmd` file to where you would like this example and its files to be stored.
```

You can open this `.Rmd` file in RStudio and follow the rest of these steps from there. (See our [section about getting started with R notebooks](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/01-getting-started/getting-started.html#how-to-get-and-use-rmds) if you are unfamiliar with `.Rmd` files.)

> Clicking this link will most likely send this to your downloads folder on your computer. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: In accordance with #302

> Move this `.Rmd` file to where you would like this example and its files to be stored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: In accordance with #302

if (!dir.exists("data")) {
  dir.create("data")
}

# Define the file path to the plots directory
plots_dir <- "plots" # Can replace with path to desired output plots directory

# Create the plots folder if it doesn't exist
if (!dir.exists(plots_dir)) {
  dir.create(plots_dir)
}

# Define the file path to the results directory
results_dir <- "results" # Can replace with path to desired output results directory

# Create the results folder if it doesn't exist
if (!dir.exists(results_dir)) {
  dir.create(results_dir)
}
```

In the same place you put this `.Rmd` file, you should now have three new empty folders called `data`, `plots`, and `results`!

## Obtain the dataset from refine.bio

For general information about downloading data for these examples, see our ['Getting Started' section](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/01-getting-started/getting-started.html#how-to-get-the-data). 

Go to this [dataset's page on refine.bio](https://www.refine.bio/experiments/GSE71270/creb-overexpression-induces-leukemia-in-zebrafish-by-blocking-myeloid-differentiation-process).

Click the "Download Now" button on the right side of this screen.  

> <img src="https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/raw/e140face75daa6d2c34e30a4755c362e6039a677/template/screenshots/download-now.png" width=200>  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<img src="https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/raw/40e47f4d3f39283effbd9843a457168061be9680/template/screenshots/download-now.png" width=200>  
```

Reviewer: For these, its easiest to search and replace the commit id.

Fill out the pop up window with your email and our Terms and Conditions:  

> <img src="https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/raw/e140face75daa6d2c34e30a4755c362e6039a677/template/screenshots/download-email.png" width=500>  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<img src="https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/raw/40e47f4d3f39283effbd9843a457168061be9680/template/screenshots/download-email.png" width=500>  
```

It may take a few minutes for the dataset to process.
You will get an email when it is ready. 

## About the dataset we are using for this example

For this example analysis, we will use this [CREB overexpression zebrafish dataset](https://www.refine.bio/experiments/GSE71270/creb-overexpression-induces-leukemia-in-zebrafish-by-blocking-myeloid-differentiation-process).
@Tregnago2016 measured microarray gene expression of ten zebrafish samples, five overexpressing human CREB, as well as five control samples.

## Place the dataset in your new `data/` folder

refine.bio will send you a download button in the email when it is ready. 
Follow the prompt to download a zip file that has a name with a series of letters and numbers and ends in `.zip`. 
Double clicking should unzip this for you and create a folder of the same name.  

> <img src="https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/raw/e140face75daa6d2c34e30a4755c362e6039a677/template/screenshots/download-folder-structure.png" width=400> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<img src="https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/raw/40e47f4d3f39283effbd9843a457168061be9680/template/screenshots/download-folder-structure.png" width=400> 
```
#300

For more details on the contents of this folder see [these docs on refine.bio](http://docs.refine.bio/en/latest/main_text.html#downloadable-files).  

The `<experiment_accession_id>` folder has the data and metadata TSV files you will need for this example analysis.
Experiment accession ids usually look something like `GSE1235` or `SRP12345`. 

Copy and paste the `GSE71270` folder into your newly created `data/` folder.

## Check out our file structure!

Your new analysis folder should contain: 

- The example analysis `.Rmd` you downloaded  
- A folder called "data" which contains:
  - The `GSE71270` folder which contains:
    - The gene expression  
    - The metadata TSV  
- A folder for `plots` (currently empty)  
- A folder for `results` (currently empty)  
    
Your example analysis folder should now look something like this (except with respective experiment accession id and analysis notebook name you are using): 

> <img src="https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/raw/e140face75daa6d2c34e30a4755c362e6039a677/template/screenshots/analysis-folder-structure.png" width=400>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<img src="https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/raw/40e47f4d3f39283effbd9843a457168061be9680/template/screenshots/analysis-folder-structure.png" width=400>
```
#300

In order for our example here to run without a hitch, we need these files to be in these locations so we've constructed a test to check before we get started with the analysis. 
Run this chunk to double check that your files are in the right place. 

> ```{r}

Reviewer: Forget this comment since this is just about ready for merging.

```{r}
readr::write_tsv(
  filtered_zebrafish_ensembl_df,
  file.path(
    results_dir,
    # Replace with a relevant output file name
    "GSE71270_filtered_zebrafish_ensembl_to_human_gene_symbol.tsv"
  )
)
```

# Resources for further learning

- [Genenames.org: the HGNC resources in 2015](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25361968/) [@Gray2015]
- [HCOP: the HGNC comparison of orthology predictions search tool](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16284797/) [@Wright2005]
- See more on [HCOP and interpreting the data in HGNC](https://www.genenames.org/help/hcop/)[@hcop-help]
- See our [RNA-seq ortholog mapping notebook](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/03-rnaseq/ortholog-mapping_rnaseq_01_ensembl.Rmd) as another applicable example, since the steps for this workflow do not change with technology. 

# Session info

At the end of every analysis, before saving your notebook, we recommend printing out your session info. 
This helps make your code more reproducible by recording what versions of software and packages you used to run this. 

```{r}
# Print session info
sessioninfo::session_info()

> ```

Reviewer: It won't let me add a line because of the backticks here, but here we will need to add a new line and then `# References` and a new line. In accordance with #301

head(filtered_zebrafish_ensembl_df)
```

Let's count how many multi-mapped genes we have now.

```{r}
filtered_zebrafish_ensembl_df %>%
  # Group by human gene symbols
  dplyr::group_by(human_symbol) %>%
  # Count the number of rows in the dataframe for each symbol
  dplyr::count() %>%
  # Filter out the symbols without multimapped genes
  dplyr::filter(n > 1)
```
Now we only have 1,803 multi-mapped genes, compared to the 4,192 that we began with.

> Although we haven't filter down to zero multi-mapped genes, we were able to filter down to a more reasonable number of _reliable_ mappings.

Reviewer 2: These additions look good. Just a small wording suggestion below.
```suggestion
Although we haven't filtered down to zero multi-mapped genes, we have hopefully removed some of the less _reliable_ mappings.
```
